 Yes, my name is Ogeno Nifon. I work for Luigi Gunsari Foundation and collaboration with
 the plant Uganda. We are conducting some inline assessment on the Playful Features project,
 which I know is in,
 We have the We have the We have the We have the you and I need you have small time, may not even take as time. In less than 30 minutes,
 or 45 there shall be done with it. So I request for your patience and cooperation so that
 we can handle this together with you. Now before I begin, are you okay that we can now begin?
 Fine. Thank you, thank you sir. Now this project is all about learning through play
 Now this project is all about learning through play in the ECD centers. And on the left we have about, there are four centers that we are conducting this survey on.
 We have what we call the treatment centers and then the control centers.
 So there are two treatment centers and then two control centers where we are going to
 have these interviews conducted on.
 Now to begin with, we are going to look at the overview of learning through play, which
 may require you, maybe we may need your input.
 Now concern number one, in your opinion, what is the importance or role of play-based learning in children's
 learning and development?
 Thank you very much, Nifon.
 These children in the ECCC centres are at the early stage of growth and quite a good number of things they learn is through play.
 If you expose a child to play you create a very healthy environment for learning to take place
 because these children cannot read and write but their heads are very clean and the hotel will expose them to a form of play, get stuck in their minds.
 So playful features is really a very suitable approach to having this children learn.
 Because at that stage, their minds is generally around play.
 Yeah, that is good. Thank you.
 We're going to the next.
 What does a playful ECD classroom look like?
 A playful ECD classroom
 looks colourful.
 In terms of playmardials.
 There must be a lot of playmariors around, either physical or physical.
 They must be available, because it's a practical thing.
 It's not theoretical.
 So the play items must be there.
 Thank you.
 Do these classrooms exist in your community?
 Yes, they do.
 Can you cite some examples? Outside our project
 arrangement. Not even that, even outside the project? Yes, in the infant classrooms.
 Like we have some organized ECD centers where you go to class and find play models there.
 Children learn to play as they sing, the songs they are singing is itself, learning itself.
 Okay.
 And they play it in the classrooms.
 Okay. That is fine. Thank you for that.
 As your department engaged the CMC or lead caregivers of EDC centers in support of learning
 through play in your district, please can you explain your response?
 Our inspectors have been going around and once they go around they observe what these people are doing, where they find gaps, together with them they see how to cover those gaps.
 And what they are doing is away from the standards required, they are supported.
 away from the standards required, they are supported. Okay.
 Yes.
 Okay.
 All right.
 That was an overview.
 Again, we will look at the involvement of the Playful Features Project.
 Are you aware of the Playful Features Project?
 Yes, I am.
 Could you explain what you know about this project?
 Well, this project, as I said before, is to emphasize learning full play.
 We know that at that stage of learning in the East City centers, it's not academic,
 but they must know academic things, and the way they are treated, this content should be through play.
 Through play.
 And this is what the project has been emphasizing.
 And the project has made it possible for the classrooms to be enriched with play models.
 For the objective to be achieved, that is learning through play.
 Through play, yes.
 Okay.
 Yeah, thank you so much for that.
 How were you involved in the Playful Features project, if at all?
 When the project was being launched, we were called for a meeting earlier first explained to us but we had more than one meeting over the same matter
 okay uh when the project came down to the ground
 we were asked together we identified the centers the areas
 the locations where the ecct centers were reconstructed
 okay together with the communities, we identify these and
 we are very involved in monitoring.
 Okay, alright.
 Thank you.
 And also, as I said before, as part of our duty, our inspectors go around to offer support
 and supervision.
 Okay, thank you.
 Now, which acting did you participate in? As I said before, I participated in the launch.
 We participated in identification of the centers.
 We have participated in monitoring and support.
 That is great.
 Now, what did you learn from these activities or interaction with the project team? The best thing I learned is that
 together when we put our hands together we can achieve
 Nobody can achieve such a big task alone
 The project alone cannot achieve without our input
 We cannot achieve alone
 without the input of the communities
 It's a task for everybody.
 It's not a task for any single person.
 That is fine.
 Are there any actions you have applied inside or outside the project
 as a result of your involvement in the Playful Features project?
 Yes. First of all, all educational institutions are supposed to be legalized.
 We have had efforts to support these people to see that they have been sent us, licensed. And even before the project came, we had interactions with these caregivers, our lead caregivers.
 At some point we organized trainings for them.
 And time and again we go for support.
 Support vision.
 Thank you sir. Now this area concerned with monitoring ECD school activities and the items under it,
 what do you think is the role of a district education official in an ECD center? Our first of all is around standards. We are supposed to ensure that all these institutions operate according to standards set by government.
 For instance, the first striking feature is we see that teaching and learning is based on the learning framework. As I pointed out before, this stage of learning is not academic.
 The children are basically meant to learn out of a school or a learning institution.
 Sanitation must be proper, playground must be available, compound must be good, structures must be safe and usable. Yes. OK. Thank you. Now, how engaged are you in monitoring
 ECD activities in your district?
 In the project lifetime, the planners
 come and involved us in the monitoring.
 And even on our own, on our own arrangements
 as supervisors in education, we have also
 ever organized support supervision and inspections of these schools.
 So we are involved 100%.
 Okay, alright.
 Now, which of the following activities do providing support for vision to teachers, involving parents
 in the ECD activities, catering for children with special needs.
 Can you explain why?
 All those activities you were nominated are intertwined.
 You can't separate one from analysis and see if it will succeed. As you go to work as a post-provision, you first gather that.
 You use it in your tool.
 That will consolidate your interaction with the teachers or the caregivers.
 In mobilizing the community, you need community.
 The children must be in school, and the community must make contributions.
 The contribution is required from them.
 So you can also create them also from these activities. All these are at that point.
 So they move together. Yes. Thank you, thank you.
 Now which activities do you find challenging to perform using those tools I have described above?
 The most challenging is working with the community. At times there are expectations which are not realistic.
 Like it is true they must contribute towards the learning of the children, the education of the children.
 But some parents are reluctant. Some are defensive. So if it becomes difficult, you need to employ a lot of skills and bring them together.
 Seeing that they cooperate, we go together.
 Could there be any other challenges?
 Another challenge is still in the community, there's economic hardship. Quite a good number of households find it difficult to offer support.
 Not only financially, but that's a challenge, a very big challenge.
 Secondly, as a department, we find it a little bit challenging to reach these goals frequently
 because of resource constraints.
 But using what is there, we try.
 Okay.
 Thank you.
 Did you receive any specific support from the Playful Features project in relation to
 monitoring ECD activities? activities if yes how has the support influenced the way you carry out your
 monetary activities We have some provision for lunch. We have some support there.
 It's a very huge support which you cannot ignore.
 That is great.
 On our own we don't have a head care transfer means.
 We struggle to reach out to these schools. And if somebody offers you transport, that's a very big step ahead.
 You can go and do more than one thing once you leave the school.
 Yes.
 Okay.
 Once that session is done, we are going to the last session,
 that is the promotion of gender equality in ECD context. Now to what extent have you supported equal access
 and participation of girls and boys in the ECD context in your community?
 Well we have encouraged the parents to send boys and girls alike to school
 and we are very sensitive around that. Okay. And we find that if you go to these classes, you find girls and boys.
 Whether disabled, we encourage all these children to access education.
 Education.
 Yes, because education is for all in this country.
 Okay.
 Yes.
 What role have you played in your community to ensure that girls access ECD the same as boys?
 Well we have not done anything segregative. All our importance has been consolidated.
 We want all children in and we have seen them at this stage at the ECD level.
 It's not a challenge. The challenge comes to the upper primary. That's when girls
 begin to get the number of girls reduced as they grow. But at this level we are talking
 about there's nothing, there's no threat to the girl's child and we are going to add very
 serious challenges around those issues. Now what role have you played in your community to ensure that children with disabilities
 and other challenges or difficulties have equal access to the ECD?
 We have in our department a specialized officer in charge of special needs. Special needs. Is ever out in the community encouraging parents who have children with disabilities
 to send them to school.
 Yes.
 Okay.
 Thank you.
 How has your department supported young girls and boys and children with disabilities
 to go to the ECD centers?
 We have, as I have said before, we have done community mobilization.
 We use the community leaders, we use the Department of Community Development, which has CDOs,
 Community Development Officers, to help us mobilize all the caregivers to offer treatment alike without discrimination,
 whether a child is able or disabled.
 So do you have some budget for that kind of group of disabilities?
 Some budget for them? It's a small budget.
 We have a small budget for them.
 Can you give some details of the budget you offer?
 The budget is like, okay,
 we have a unit at a level of primary school
 for primary school going children who are disabled.
 There's what they call a sub-vention grant that we sent there to support them.
 The budget also supports the education officer in charge of special needs to go and do activities around that area of special needs education. He asked money for some small allowance for this travel inland,
 repair of motorcycle or some fuel although the figure is small but there's some commitment towards
 that. Okay I've got you right. As your department engage the lead caregivers in the ECBS in your
 district in support of equal access and participation of girls and boys in education?
 Yes, we have held meetings with them. At one point we held training.
 Sometimes, with another organization, we offer training to the ECG centers, to these caregivers. and we also met the CMCs so that we work together and get all these children
 access to education. As I said before, there are however challenges from some households
 who do not take disabled children, give them the weight they deserve. No.
 That's how it is, yeah.
 But we are tired.
 No, you talked of other organizations apart from PLAM.
 Is there any other organization that maybe is trying to give support apart from PLAM?
 Currently, we only have ADINA.
 ADINA? We only have a dinner. A dinner? Dinner is specifically for disabled children.
 A short while ago we had a leasing.
 That was around here.
 But the biggest of this is flat.
 Now, we want to come to the conclusion of our discussion.
 But before we conclude, in your opinion, as the playful projects improve the status of education
 in your district?
 Wonderfully well.
 Of course, the constructions they have done,
 the field construction they have done is outstanding.
 Okay.
 The study, the teaching learning materials
 they have provided is wonderfully good.
 study the teaching learning materials they have provided. It's wonderfully good to the end. Thank you so much. Okay, please.
 Yeah.
